- [Instructor] Now let's take a look at the servlet
lifecycle from the code perspective.
In one of the previous videos, we had written out the
home servlet and done the configuration of this
inside web.xml.
We're going to use the same servlet for exhibiting the
lifecycle of the servlet.
Now, let's first understand the configuration I have written
out a home servlet which extends the HTTP servlet
and inside the web xml file I have
done the configuration for it.
That's the servlet tag for the home servlet
and there are to URL patterns that I have defined
for the servlet.
You can do this.
You can have multiple URL patterns defined
for exactly the same servlet.
But please note that one URL pattern cannot
point to two different servlets.
Right.
Let's come back to home servlet.
And now we know that the lifecycle methods are typically
init, service, and destroy,
out of which service must never be overwritten because it's
already implemented in the HTTP servlet class,
but init and destroy however can definitely be overwritten
by the developer.
Now what is the job of this servlet?
There is a do get method that we have generated here.
The job of this home servlet is only to forward the control
to the index dot html file, which is nothing but
our landing page.
The purpose of inserting the home servlet in our application
is, that we do not want to access the index dot html
as a static resource.
We have already studied that as a part of the requisite
dispatch video.
We know that we need to go to a servlet and then go to
an html or jsp using the forwarding mechanism so that we're
always save and we do not reveal any details
of our code in the URL.
So we're going to do that now in the home servlets
do get method.
Let's come to line number 16.
And I'm going to take the requisite dispatcher out
of the request object.
Feed the path of the index.html.
And invoke the forward API along with the request and
response objects.
That's all that this servlet's do get method is going
to do for us.
So now, do get is overwritten, so when the service gets
called, do get is going to be automatically invoked.
Let's go ahead and also write out the
init and destroy methods.
So I'm going to generate those methods quickly.
They can be generated in any IDE that you may be using.
So let's get rid of the parent calls.
And this is the signature,
it's a public method, does not return anything
and would probably throw servlet exception in case your
instantiation process goes wrong.
So what are we going to do here?
We are going to have the initialization activity.
So here, we're going to setup the connection object.
Similarly, let's also generate the destroy method.
Let's get rid of the parent calls and let's look
at the signature, it's a public method,
does not return anything.
And what are we going to do here?
We are going to do the cleanup activity.
So basically we're going to close that db connection object.
Let me change this comment do db connection object.
That's right.
Now let's go ahead, let's take a connection variable here.
Let's say public,
connection and initially let's set it to null.
And then let's come inside the init method and that's the
place we're going to set it up for the initialization
process, so on line number 26,
I'm going to take that reference that I created just now,
and we'll call the db connection class and access our
own method of get connection to database.
So what I've done is I've basically consulted the
db connection class and got in the connection object.
So this is that initialization code that I'm putting
under the init method.
Similarly, under the destroy method,
let's do the cleanup activity.
So what we are going to do is on line number 35
I'm going to take that same connection object
and I'm just going to invoke the close API on it
so that it gets closed when this application is getting
undeployed or when the server is getting shutdown.
Why do you see this error is because this line
could possibly throw an SQL exception so we're going to
quickly surround it with a try catch block.
Additionally, let's also do one more thing.
Let's put logs in each of these methods.
What I mean is, I'm going to just press enter here and
on line number 29, I'm going to enter a line saying
in init method.
This is just kind of tracing activity so that when this
entire servlet runs, we get those sys outs and we
understand that oh yes, init indeed got called.
Similar thing we'll do in the rest of the methods.
So let me copy this line number 29,
go in the destroy method and paste it at line number 35.
And change this message.
Right.
And I'll do the same thing for do get as well.
So I'm going to come here,
and on line number 20, I'll paste the same line number 30.
That's what I'm going to do and I'm going to change this
message which is do get.
So this is just a kind of tracing I want to do so that
I understand where and which method did I land up in.
Right.
Okay, so we're ready with all the lifecycle methods now.
Let's deploy this application and understand how the
lifecycle runs.
So this is my root page and I'm going to access the
home servlets URL pattern, which is this,
so let me click enter.
And let's check the console.
Do you see?
The init method got called.
That's because I made the first request to that servlet.
So the first time the servlet is called the init method
will be invoked, then these two sys outs that you see
are from the db connection class which I've been able to
successfully setup the connection, and then it went into the
do get method.
Now let me do one thing.
I hit this URL again.
Let me hit it again.
Do you see?
Every time the do get keeps getting called.
Now for all the other requests, all the repeated requests
that I made to that same servlet,
init never got called again.
It was only that the do get kept getting called.
And this happened because after init for every
other repeated request, the service method was called
and from there the call was delegated to the do get method.
Let me do one more thing.
Let me undeploy this application from the server.
So let's go, right click, add and remove,
and let's say you're going to remove h plus sample.
Say finish.
It'll show you some errors because the server is already
starting while you're trying to undeploy.
Let's just say okay.
And do you see?
You get the sys out from the destroy method,
so whenever your application is getting undeployed,
that's the point the destroy method will be invoked.
Please also not that in that init method where we setup
the database connection, that's not how you will do
in your live project.
In the live project, in the init method you can
setup a complete connection pool,
which has got a lot of database objects and that
can be reused by the users for your application.
So right now just for the demo purposes we are setting
just a single database connection object but in your
real life project, you definitely will have connection
pooling implemented.
So that's how the lifecycle of a servlet operates
in that order,
init, service, and destroy.